# DogBreedClassifierApp

##  Overview


The objective of this application is to primarily predict whether a given image is of a dog or of a human using Convolutional Neural Networks. If it's either of them, the application will need to further determine the kind of breed the dog is, or which dog breed the human most resembles. When the given image is neither a dog nor a human, predicting the breed wouldn't execute!


**File Descriptions**

**folder/files:**
- dog_app.ipynb: python notebook file with fully functional code, all code cells executable
- web_app/dog_app.html: python notebook with the executed results converted to html
- haarcascades/haarcascade_frontalface_alt: Haar feature-based cascade classifiers for face detection
- images folder: Images for the notebook and to test the algorithm are found here
- data/dog_names.csv: Contains names of the dog 

 **models:**
- saved_models folder: contains the best model weights saved of pre-trained models. These weights can be generated by training the models weights.best.VGG19.hdf5, weights.best.VGG16.hdf5 and weights.best.from_scratch.hdf5 

 **app:**
- run.py: Runs the Flask web app
- templates: HTML files for web app

**Usage**

Clone the repo using:
> git clone https://github.com/RayalaNK/DogBreedClassifierApp.git

Run the following command to run your web app after navigating into the app directory.
> cd web_app

> python app.py

Go to the URL:

> http://0.0.0.0:3001/ or http://localhost:3001

Upload an image of a dog or a human to predict the breed or resemblence respectively:
# Conclusion
## Project Definition:
* The objective of the project is to build a pipeline to process real-world, user-supplied images and map them to a dog breed or closer looking dog breed if human's image is given as the input. We used Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN's)  to map the breed of a dog from the input image. 
* Given an image of a dog, the model will identify and predict the canine’s breed. 
* If supplied an image of a human, it will identify the resembling dog breed.

## Analysis 
There are 2 different stages where we have done analysis.
### Stage 1, Building own model:
* While building **own model**, have tried different architectures by *changing the number of layers, size of filters, dropout layers* and playing with other hyper-parameters.
* While adding more number of **fully connected** layers, have observed over-fitting our training data, as I have seen number of parameters grow quite a lot by adding fully-connected layers. So tried to **regularize** the network by adding **dropout layers**, using dropout of upto **80%** and the layers still seems to overfit; so removed some of the fully connected layers and started playing with convolution layers.
* After removing some of the fully connected layers we observed there was less over-fitting and tried to add/change the convolution/pooling layers sizes and observed less over-fitting and increase in validation accuracy.
* I believe, playing  with other *hyper-parameters* like **learning rate**, **different optimizers like adam** would help building a better network. 
### Stage 2, Using an ImageNet trained backbone:
* I have chosen Xception as my backbone first, but realized the model bottleneck_features are ~3GB and it failed when I tried to download onto this server, tried wget in the ipython notebook and also tried to download the file on to my computer and uploaded it; it reaches to 2GB and stops. So ended up using VGG19 since its way smaller than 2GB and it worked!
* I have seen a huge jump in validation accuracy using vgg19 vs using vgg16 as a backbone.I think using Xception or ResNet architectures might give better results.
* Transfer learning also helped to initialize the weights in a much better manner, while my own model might have got stuck in a local minima, also changing several hyper-parameters might help to increase my models accuracy as well. 
## Conclusion 
* Model performance was way better than excepted. 
* VGG19 model outperformed all the previous models (VGG16 backbone).
* Fully connected layers have more number of model parameters.
* Adding more fully connected layers tend to overfit data, but regularizing them helps.
* Playing with other hyper-parameters like learning rate, or different optimizers might give better results.
* Transfer learning or using pre-trained weights to convert image features helps a lot.

 
**Acknowledgements**

> Udacity for providing all the data and neccessary details around the project.
> Dog Breed Identification (https://www.kaggle.com/c/dog-breed-identification)

**Copyright and License**
> Code is released under the MIT License.
